[AIT-767] uts: live objects ground work (#1209)
ably/ably-java: .claude/skills/uts-to-kotlin/SKILL.md

---
description: "Translate a UTS pseudocode test spec into Kotlin tests in the uts module. Usage: /uts-to-kotlin <path-to-spec-file>"
allowed-tools: Bash, Read, Edit, Write
---

You are translating a UTS pseudocode test spec file into a runnable Kotlin test in the `uts` module. Follow these steps in order.

---

> 

Reviewer: Should there be a reference to https://github.com/ably/specification/blob/main/uts/docs/writing-derived-tests.md ?

Author: Added

## Step 1 — Read the spec

Read the file at `$ARGUMENTS`. Identify:

> - All test cases (each has an ID like `RTN4a`, `RSC1`, etc. and a description)

Reviewer: There's a structured ID for each test, eg `realtime/unit/RSA4c2/callback-error-connecting-disconnected-0` (eg https://github.com/ably/specification/blob/main/uts/realtime/unit/auth/auth_callback_errors_test.md#rsa4c2---authcallback-error-during-connecting-transitions-to-disconnected)

Author: Yeah it's weird, because later in the doc it uses structured ID, updated

---
description: "Translate a UTS pseudocode test spec into Kotlin tests in the uts module. Usage: /uts-to-kotlin <path-to-spec-file>"
allowed-tools: Bash, Read, Edit, Write
---

> Translate the UTS pseudocode test spec at `$ARGUMENTS` into a runnable Kotlin test in the `uts` module.

Reviewer 2: If `$ARGUMENTS` not provided, skill should either explicitly prompt for `$ARGUMENTS` with format of the give file.

Reviewer 2: Also, if required/sufficient information is not available in `$ARGUMENTS`, then skill should log error and return early

Reviewer 2: Can you just double check about this? Or atleast throw error/log message if `ARGUMENTS` not provided

> Reference: [Writing Derived Tests](https://github.com/ably/specification/blob/main/uts/docs/writing-derived-tests.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reference: [Writing Derived Tests](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ably/specification/refs/heads/main/uts/docs/writing-derived-tests.md)
```
It's easier for LLM to fetch/understand raw markdown than HTML page

Reviewer 2: When skill is loaded, it doesn't necessarily load `Reference` markdown. 
It's better we make fetch mandatory.

> *Note* - Always fetch [Writing Derived Tests](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ably/specification/refs/heads/main/uts/docs/writing-derived-tests.md) as a part of SKILL load.

Author: fixed

Reviewer 2: Btw, can you make sure skill always fetch the URL with a note
```
Note - Always fetch [Writing Derived Tests](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ably/specification/refs/heads/main/uts/docs/writing-derived-tests.md) as a part of SKILL load.
```

Reviewer 2: Markdown fetch is not made mandatory, otherwise without enough context LLM will hallucinate

Reviewer 2: We have faced similar issues previously, where reference URLs are not fetched unless made explicitly mandatory

- The protocol used (WebSocket for Realtime, HTTP for REST)
- Any timer usage (`enable_fake_timers`, `ADVANCE_TIME`)

---

## Step 2 — Determine output path and package

Map the spec path to a test path:

| Spec location | Test location |
|---|---|
| `.../uts/test/rest/unit/<name>.md` | `uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/rest/unit/<Name>Test.kt` |
| `.../uts/test/realtime/unit/<sub>/<name>.md` | `uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/realtime/unit/<sub>/<Name>Test.kt` |

Class name: take the file name, strip `_test` suffix, convert `snake_case` → `PascalCase`, append `Test`.

Example: `connection_state_machine_test.md` → `ConnectionStateMachineTest`

Package: derived from the output path under `kotlin/`.

---

## Step 3 — Read infrastructure files

Read ALL of these before generating any code (you need exact method signatures):

```
uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/ClientFactories.kt
uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/test/mock/MockWebSocket.kt
uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/test/mock/MockHttpClient.kt
uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/test/mock/PendingRequest.kt
uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/test/mock/PendingConnection.kt
uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/test/mock/FakeClock.kt

> uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/test/mock/MockEvent.kt

Reviewer 2: Can't we put all of those in single `uts.infra` package? We need to update skill everytime infrastructure changes wdyt

Reviewer 2: or atleast include `uts.infra.*`/ uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/test/mock/*` package

Author: done

Reviewer 2: Should be `uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/uts/infra` instead of `uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib.uts/infra`

```

Fix any compilation errors and recompile until clean. Common issues:
- Missing imports
- Method names differ from what you read in the mock files (use the exact names from Step 3)
- `ErrorInfo` constructor arg order is `(message, statusCode, code)`

---

## Step 6 — Run tests

```bash
./gradlew :uts:test --tests "<package>.<ClassName>"
```

Handle test failures using this decision tree (see [reference doc](https://github.com/ably/specification/blob/main/uts/docs/writing-derived-tests.md) for full detail):

```
Test fails
  |
  +-- Does UTS spec match features spec?
  |     NO  → fix test, record UTS spec error in deviations file
  |     YES
  |       +-- Does test accurately translate the UTS spec?
  |             NO  → fix the test (no deviation entry needed)
  |             YES → SDK deviation — adapt test, record in deviations file
```

### Deviation patterns

**Env-gated skip (preferred)** — test contains spec-correct assertions but is skipped by default:

```kotlin
/**
 * @UTS realtime/unit/RSA4c2/callback-error-connecting-disconnected-0
 */
@Test
fun `RSA4c2 - callback error connecting disconnected`() = runTest {
    // DEVIATION: see deviations.md

>     if (System.getenv("RUN_DEVIATIONS") != null) return@runTest

Reviewer 2: **Polarity is backwards — this example skips when `RUN_DEVIATIONS` is set, not when it's unset.**

```kotlin
if (System.getenv("RUN_DEVIATIONS") != null) return@runTest
```

The surrounding text on line 326 says *"test contains spec-correct assertions but is **skipped by default**"*, which means:
- Default (`RUN_DEVIATIONS` unset) → **skip**
- `RUN_DEVIATIONS=1` set → **run** the spec-correct assertions and prove the deviation exists

As written, this example does the opposite. A future translator following the SKILL verbatim will produce backwards deviation tests that pass by default *because they're skipping the assertion when they should be running it*.

Note: the actual test at `ConnectionRecoveryTest.kt:304` gets it right (`if (… != null) { assertEquals(...) }` — assertion only runs when env var is set). Only the SKILL example is wrong.

**Suggested fix:**

```kotlin
if (System.getenv("RUN_DEVIATIONS") == null) return@runTest
```

Reviewer 2: Yes, as per https://github.com/ably/specification/blob/main/uts/docs/writing-derived-tests.md#3-deviation-test-patterns, this makes sense.

Reviewer 2: Can you double check if this was an intentional change?

Author: yes, that's valid

Reviewer 2: I mean, do we intend to correct this? Like spec https://github.com/ably/specification/blob/main/uts/docs/writing-derived-tests.md#3-deviation-test-patterns says to change it

Author: fixed

Reviewer 2: This doesn't seem like fixed yet?

    // ... spec-correct setup and assertions ...
}
```

**Adapted assertion** — when you still want to assert on the SDK's actual behaviour to prevent regressions:

```kotlin
// DEVIATION: spec requires error code 40106, SDK returns 40160 — see deviations.md
assertEquals(40160, error.errorInfo.code)
```

> **Never use the accommodate-both pattern** (accept either spec or SDK behaviour). Every test must assert either spec behaviour or the SDK's actual behaviour — never both at once.

Reviewer 2: I don't like idea of accommodating `SDK behaviour` when we accept `UTS spec` as source of truth. 
We should only accept `UTS spec behaviour`
Maybe this should explicitly go into `deviations.md`. 
Not sure why we agreed on it here -> https://github.com/ably/specification/blob/main/uts/docs/writing-derived-tests.md#3-deviation-test-patterns:~:text=Avoid%20the%20accommodate%2Dboth%20pattern

Author: source of truth is spec anyway, if llm should check spec compliance

Reviewer 2: yeah, maybe some reason we kept it

### Deviations file

> Append to `uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/deviations.md`. Each entry needs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deviation file should be created at `uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/deviations.md` ( Required for `Evaluation` phase). Each entry is appended with:
```

Author: updated

Reviewer 2: Can't see the change : (

## Step 3 — Read infrastructure files

> Read ALL of files in `uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib.uts/infra` before generating any code (you need exact method signatures).

Reviewer 2: `uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib/uts/infra` instead of `uts/src/test/kotlin/io/ably/lib.uts/infra` right?
